hi everyone Laszlo Montgomery again
finally talking about something else
besides tea I mean great subject at all
but we haven't had anything except tea
here at the CHP since those back house
episodes from July 2014 for this hundred
and fiftieth episode milestone event in
the history of the China history podcast
we're going to look at the Hakka people
of China senior management here at the
CHP has tasked me with reading and
answering all emails so I can say with
some authority that this topic is off to
Requested I have the Hakkasan a short
list of topics that I initially put
together back in 2010 so this one is
long overdue
before we get right on it let's all be
honest anyone even remotely familiar
with Chinese history has heard of the
Hakka people or perhaps counts one or
two among their friends or acquaintances
perhaps your huckle yourself
they've been mentioned from time to time
throughout these podcast episodes but
who are the Jaquez and where do they get
that name are they a minority ethnic
group what part of China are they from
why do they seem to be all over the
world to an English speaker that's a
catchy name Hakka you remember that one
after hearing it just once
it's a Cantonese word Hawk means gassed
and cob means family or people in
English this is usually translated to
mean guests people well what does that
mean guests of whom the jaquez have
shared the stage with everyone else who
made history in China for the past 2,000
years I thought in this episode we can
get a nice simple overview and
appreciation about their place in the
big China history picture because they
go so way back you know how it is
records are scarce and whatever there is
from way back when was often speculation
built on ancient genealogy records so
even in our 21st century the $64,000
question still remains where exactly did
the jaquez originate there are several
theories that have come up over the
years thanks to a great deal of
scholarly research that's
hasn't led up several general
conclusions have been made about the
origin of the Hakka people when you're
talking about written records anything
from before the 10th century is just too
far back so little survives as far as
written records go compared with since
the Song Dynasty China was just too old
for the writing substrates of the day
even if it's carved in stone a thousand
years will take care of that but the
Hakka people by and large maintain the
records of their ancestors very
meticulously and in the present day
plenty of Hakka people can recount their
family's genealogy going back 20 and 30
generations to the Song Dynasty and from
these records you can trace where the
clan went from north to south and once
or twice again after the initial
southern migration there are
approximately give or take more than 80
million Hakka people worldwide they
along with their one-time nemec's the
Cantonese Chinese and Fujian E's were
the highest groups of early Chinese
immigrants who spread out all over the
world mostly in the 19th century in
China today there may be 35 to 40
million Jaquez but 3 percent of the
total China population after all the
research I found there's a story that
has been put together that though fill
the stereotypes gives one an easy to
digest version of the events that shaped
the Hakka identity at first you might
think the Hakka czar one of the 56
ethnic minority people in China but
they're not there they're Han Chinese
yep they're part of the ninety one and a
half percent there Han Chinese but speak
a dialect special only to them the Hakka
dialect has six tones Cantonese has
eight and Mandarin his four or five a
few company chiral tone Mandarin
speakers will be able to pick up a few
words of Hakka here and there but
overall it's as unintelligible as the
next dialect some linguists have said
that huh Connie's was the bridge
language between Mandarin and Cantonese
after reading that I went on YouTube and
pulled up a few videos of people
speaking and singing Hakka knees I
definitely could see why someone might
say that herring the Hakka dialect it
certainly isn't Mandarin or Cantonese
but it seemed as if it was something in
between these two
some historians or jaquez claim that the
Hakka dialect is the original Chinese
from the most ancient times and some
take this even further by saying the
Hakka are the true ears to pure Chinese
culture because when they left the north
at the end of the Western Jin they were
the only ones who kept the original
culture and traditions of the central
plain intact the Han who stayed behind
had their Shaanxi Hunan Shandong Yellow
River culture corrupted by the invading
Turks and Mongols the Hakka language is
closer to the gun group of languages
than anything else the Chinese character
gun is what you'll see on the license
plates of cars registered in Jiang Shi
Province the land of gun where the gun
river flows and the city of gang Jo is
located it's for this reason that some
have postulated that the Hakka aren't
from the north or north-central part of
China at all they're actually
southerners from around Yong Shi again
there's no complete agreement on the
origins of the Hakka people except to
say they were probably from the North
University of Oregon Center for Asian
and Pacific studies professor Mary
Arbaugh had written there are about
thirty three million Hakka in China who
speak the Hakka language 33 million not
a small number that's that's all of
Australia's population and Sweden too
you could throw in Pitcairn Island in
the Vatican City one interesting thing I
read was that Hakka was perhaps the
language spoken during the Tong dynasty
they say this because when you read Tong
poetry in the Hakka language all the
rhyming patterns returned that are
missing when reading it in the
Putin waa pronunciation one of the
problems regarding their origins is like
I said not having much to hang your hat
on as far as any surviving records
regarding their exact origin most
scholars agree they came from the
heartland in China along the Yellow
River xiangxi Conan northern on play and
Hull Bay some versions say Conan in
Shandong but it was up where the
traditional cradle of Chinese
civilization was situated if you recall
from chb episode 22 I discussed the
story of SU my yin and how at the end of
the Three Kingdoms period he snatched
power from the hallway rulers and went
on to defeat the kingdoms of Schewel and
eastern wool he founded the Jin dynasty
and to a TCE and for the first time
since the Han China was unified under
one emperor the Jin was divided up into
the western and eastern periods the
Western Jin under founder Jin wildy set
up their Palace and law Jung so early in
the movie the founding Emperor dies 289
it was immediately all downhill from
there on the emperor ship went from a
bad Emperor to a tragic one and you'll
recall that last Western Qin Emperor
Emperor mean this final Western Jean
Emperor's last chapter in life at the
hands of his barbarian captors almost
rivaled the Sun Emperor Wei Zhong as far
as tragic and degrading went famine was
rampant by the end of the Western Jin
dynasty even the Emperor lived on scraps
the reason for all this hardship was
because of the wool the so-called five
barbarian tribes show-nu gia Chien Bay
Dee and Chung these guys surrounded
China to the north and west you remember
from past episodes they had been the
scourge of China since the Han Dynasty
now mostly shown no and shinbei tribes
began acting the role that the future
12th century Jurchens would play when
they steamrolled over
song and force the Royal House of Joel
to flee to the south below the eunsuh in
311 the Western Jin were booted out of
law young and the capital was sacked
their new capital moved to the south in
Gen Con which is today's nanjing with
the mighty Yuans ax acting as their
Great Wall so to speak the eastern or
later gene we're able to make a comeback
and lasted another century from 317 to
420 before they too were taken down by
Leo you who founded the Leo song the
first of the southern dynasties of the
Nunb age hall now this is the critical
moment in Hakka history it was during
this time in the 4th century CE II when
the invasions from the north began and
the Western Jin began to fold that these
Han Chinese people living mostly where
the yellow river flowed decided to get
as far away from the invading Xiong nu
and shinbei people as possible unmask
this group of Han who all had this
common ancestral language and culture
picked up and started heading south and
they brought with them this language
that over the coming centuries would
blend and adapt to the lands were they
later Mike settle in and according to
tradition after a period of migrating
southward they coalesced around a place
called Sherby village it's right on the
Fujian side of the jiangshi Fujian
border that was there yeah none so to
speak this place sure B village is what
many who call themselves Hakka refer to
as the jewel deep Ning hua County in
Fujian the other ancestral place not too
far away to the south maybe two to three
hours from sure beat by car is ting Joe
or present-day Chongqing these are two
rather sacred places and Hakka history
there are two popular versions about the
number of migrations and when the Hakka
people made them loss Yong lien was an
early 20th century Hakka scholar
professor law 1906 to 1978
provided groundbreaking research into
the origins of the Jaquez and their
migrations from north to south through
painstaking study and analysis of
genealogy records going back to before
the song los yung lean concluded that
the Hakka people carried out five waves
of migration in his 1933 book an
introduction to the study of oaxaca's
Kuja yong-jo da leo
more postulated on what caused these
migrations and where these jaquez ended
up another popular analysis was proposed
by Mary Arbaugh her important work that
I read in the China quarterly was
entitled the secret history of the
Jaquez the Chinese Revolution as a Hakka
Enterprise in her work among many other
interesting things she says there were
four migrations not five I mentioned
it's popularly believed that the first
wave of Hakka migration occurred as the
western Jean began to fall apart early
4th century CE II this would have been
right before the Council of Nicaea the
time of Constantine the first and west
barbarian invasions social unrest and
upheavals disease and famine high
taxation and severe poverty nothing like
those things to get people to pick up
and vacate the premises so they left
their original homeland in China first
to escape the violence of these northern
neighbors when people started fleeing
the north it wasn't just a Hakka people
there were other aristocrats and
commoners from all over North China who
were packing up and heading south not
every single han chinese bolted from the
north that was impossible most had to
look at their meagre options and choose
to tough it out rather than migrate and
face an uncertain future
another migration of jaquez from the
north happened towards the end of the
Tang Dynasty due mainly to the
turbulence caused by the Quan Chau
uprising from 881 880 for the Tang
Dynasty by that time was already not
long for this world and their slow
demise
eyes assured in a period of instability
and disunity in northern China that
would last until Jo Quan Yin would found
the Song Dynasty in 960 the next time
that a significant wave of Hakka people
hit the road and migrated from north to
south occurred when our old friend and
parades on got chased out of chi fun by
his northern church and neighbors as you
recall from that four-part wait song
series the Jurchens invaded from the
north of China and made life unbearable
for the Han Chinese as it happened at
the end of the Western Jin and after the
Huang Xiao uprising during the tong yet
again at the end of the northern song
the Hakka is his group made a move
southward to escape to more peaceful
lands the later fourth and fifth waves
of migration were more about the Jaquez
leaving the mothership in eastern Fujian
parts of hull Bay Western jiangshi in
northeast Guangdong and spreading out
from there to other parts of China and
throughout the world in fact it was said
that those Hakka who had earlier left
the north and were all settled in genchi
province provided assistance to the
escaped Chou royal family when they made
their perilous trip to the south to lean
on where they established the southern
Song Court this is an early example of
how the Hakka has gained a reputation in
the eyes of the government for their
reliability in answering the call of
duty more about this later it's
generally agreed that it was during the
southern song that the Jaquez first made
their way in greater numbers from
fuu-chin to Guangdong province and it's
during the southern song that the Hakka
for the first time began showing up in
government records as a distinct group
of people they were referred to as not
the original inhabitants of the places
south of the young so where they
concentrated these last waves of
migration happened during the late Ming
Dynasty and into the Ching and I guess
it's really about this time that the
Hakka identity began to solidify in
China before they had run for their
lives chased by fierce northern
Kirkuk and Mongol armies now after they
had carved out a new home for themselves
in the south henceforth they'd be
running from and sometimes facing down
their fellow Han Chinese in addition to
the usual causes for migration a rather
large explosion in China's population in
the Ming and Ching put even further
pressure on available agricultural lands
the Jaquez if you could say anything
about them were natural farmers although
millions emigrated overseas and engaged
in all manners of muscle jobs and other
professions for the most part in China
they farmed the Hakka dream was that one
Sun might rise through the system to
become a government official education
was a Hakka priority and although the
deck was often stacked against them as
far as becoming an official many Hakka
scholars performed well enough in the
civil service exams to go on to careers
in the government but short of that
agriculture was the primary Hakka
profession they knew how to do that well
and it didn't matter how poor the
growing conditions were Hakka farmers
were notorious for being able to farm
any land no matter how high up in the
mountains they had the farm they were by
the early Ching well known for their
toughness and reputation for moving
about and acting as pioneers developing
new vacant lands if you recall from
previous CHP episodes after 1644 when
the Manchus took over and founded the
Ching dynasty the most famous holdout -
Ching authority was Jung Chung Gong
better known as cut Ginga from his
Taiwan base he kept up the fight against
the Manchus his objective was to
overthrow the Manchus and restore the
Han Chinese Ming Dynasty so much
pressure head Kok shingu caused raiding
the Guangdong and Fujian coasts that the
kunshi Emperor in 1662 called for an
evacuation of those coastal areas
everyone who lived there had to move
inland 50 Li
about 19 miles this sorry state of
affairs lasted until 1669 it was a
disaster for the people there who were
all farmers and fishermen nothing could
have been more disruptive to their lives
the Cantonese were hardest hit by this
evacuation decree during the period of
this ban all manners of natural
disasters had hit those areas hard I
read about 90% of the Cantonese affected
by this chin high Ling
as it was known perished and were not
able to return when the coast was
finally clear either there was nothing
to return to or the people had perished
from all the blowback of the kunshi
Emperor's edict that became the roots of
a very big problem when the Kangxi
Emperor called the whole thing off and
permitted everyone to return from where
they came the officials in the Imperial
Palace were alarmed to discover that
there weren't enough people left in the
region to repopulate the vacated coastal
areas the original inhabitants the Bundy
as they were known at least in Mandarin
had mostly died or moved elsewhere the
word went forth from the Imperial Palace
to recruit people and to offer
government incentives to migrate to
those areas mostly along the guangdong
northeast coast this was from about the
Chao Chao shantou area north along the
coast the Jaquez enthusiastically
answered the government's call and they
began to settle these areas and put them
back together after all the devastation
wrought by all those years of everything
nature could throw at the south china
coast well I read everyone sort of got
along for a while but it didn't take
long before the Bundy and the rather
recently arrived Takas came to blows
these Bundy were called yet people yet
means Guangdong you'll see this
character on all Guangdong registered
license plates they all speak variations
of Cantonese of the good dialect so
right off the bat these two neighbors
the Bundy the local your people and
these
really arrived guests people these could
shout Iran or Hakka his coaches
pronouncing cantonese lived side by side
but animosities brood over the
circumstances of the jaquez sudden and
overwhelming presence in these
traditionally you had lands the
differences between the u.s. and the
Hakka were just linguistic and cultural
the bundy having had a running head
start on the Jaquez already long
populated the best farmlands the best
areas the fertile plains were all taken
by the bundy europe so the Hakka for the
most part took everything that was left
over and less desirable it was less
desirable because this land was higher
up in elevation in the hills and much
less fertile there developed an old
saying quote he is not a Hakka who was
not upon a hill there is no hill but has
Jaquez on it end quote
so into the eighteenth century these
wounds festered and no matter which
village these Hakka migrants would go to
they were instantly branded something
other than local no matter where the
Jaquez went Hunan guanxi su chuan Hainan
Taiwan and most of all Fujian jiangshi
and Guangdong they were called Hakka for
a reason even though they always came in
relatively large numbers and stuck to
themselves the bundy the local people to
ride at them and a kind of prejudice
against the Hakka people was created
that was handed down from generation to
generation and at first this word Hakka
was a Cantonese derogatory term they
weren't trying to sound polite calling
them guest people but it was the Hakka
who seized that term from the Cantonese
with its negative connotations and took
possession of this term and after taking
ownership were in the end quite proud to
call themselves Hakka from about the
third migration onward the city of Majo
began to evolve into a sort of Hakka
homeland Majo comprises what I call the
Northeast
shoulder of Guangdong province I guess
today you can call this region the
worldwide center of Hakka culture the
way they speak Hakka knees and majo is
considered to be the Buin or standard
that all other flavors of Hakka knees
are compared to Mei Shen where make
ounty and neighboring Jia Yan that's
Hakka command central
you are absolutely guaranteed to be able
to find a dish of Yin Xiu Jie and Yong
tofu almost anywhere you go in and
around Majo North East Guangdong South
West Fujian South East jiangshi the
Hakka people had sufficient mass in
numbers to turn those parts of this
large region into Hakka controlled
territory but elsewhere the Jaquez were
always the new family on the block and
not having that common language or
common tradition as the Bondi and eating
their unfamiliar foods invariably they
were more often than not rejected by
strangers who found the Hakka presence
in their own ancestral lands offensive
so with this kind of brimming animosity
already bubbling below the surface it
never took long before some sort of land
dispute would arise or some outrageous
action taken over a wedding agreement
between a haka and a Bundy but the
littlest things would flare up into
these Hatfield and McCoy feud is over
night and would last for years or never
get resolved in Fujian it was invariably
Hakka versus bondi who in this case
because they were from Fujin were the
mean people in Guangdong the bundi were
the yet these weren't the only groups of
people often hostile to the jacquez but
because the greatest concentration of
Hakka people was in and around the lands
bordering northern Guangdong and
southern Fujin it was these rivalries
that are best known the worst Bundy haka
violence however would be seen in the
West Pearl River Delta
during the bloodiest years of the Bundy
Hakka clan
Wars or too cushy adult between 1855 and
1867 but twelve years partly concurrent
with the Taiping rebellion there
occurred a series of conflicts that in
the end left a million people dead I
think I mentioned this upheaval in a
previous episode where I discussed why
so many toys shun people in particular
got up and left they're happy and
bucolic homes in the West Pearl River
Delta these battles between the haka and
the Cantonese we're often lopsided
because the Hakka were much smaller and
numbers compared to the Cantonese plus
the Cantonese had all the backup support
from their overseas relatives I have
read in a few sources the deaths from
the to Koshien though were put at about
half a million on each side I have no
idea how such statistics were arrived at
but the numbers suggest this was a
terrible time for the outnumbered jaquez
and for all the Cantonese who
participated willingly or unwillingly in
this 12-year conflict it was more than a
decade of misery compounded on the
general lawless and unstable state of
affairs that existed in China during
this change how ammonia and time the
opium wars the red turban revolt Taiping
rebellion bundi Hakka clan wars the
Europeans the missionaries wherever the
Hakka went they often faced ostracism
from the societies they settled among
their economic prospects were usually
more grim than their undie rival and as
I said they worked the most unfavorable
lands all of these things combined all
grew to define the Hakka hardworking not
afraid to take on any challenge quick to
adapt and not afraid to pick up and move
to some destination unknown the yeah and
the mean didn't get along with them and
the insults traded back and forth were
pretty vicious the Jaquez were painted
by the yeah and mean as barbarian and
not
puron their Yellow River origins were
not acknowledged nor was their ancient
scholarship and more accomplished
ancestors there was plenty of disrespect
heaped on each other and both sides gave
as much as they took after the
foreigners beginning in the 1840s barged
their way into China hundreds and
hundreds of missionaries flocked to
China and were free to roam the
countryside to do their work the
missionaries and the oppressed Hakka
people seemed made for each other the
missionaries were attracted to the
Jaquez and reaped a halfway-decent
harvest as far as Christian converts
went so successful were they amongst the
Hakka that the Hakka
represented a disproportionate amount of
the total number of converts in the
areas the missionaries resided in
oppressed and distressed Hakka might
find something attractive and what the
missionaries preached converting to
Christianity wasn't a bad thing at all
but it did upset the traditional social
dynamic wherever it happened on the one
hand some say the Christian missionaries
came in and corrupted the pure Hakka
culture on the other hand the
missionaries who did their work in Hakka
communities were instrumental in
promoting health and education and in
sending many young Hakka men to England
to study on scholarships sometimes
Westerners didn't mean to but they ended
up getting caught up in all manners of
local politics and it wasn't rare to be
involved in one way or another in
matters concerning bundi an Hakka the
missionaries have also been accused of
fuelling the myth of the stereotypical
haka and they didn't shy away from
influencing foreign opinions regarding
the bundi Hakka clan wars there was
constant intermarriage and interaction
between Hakka and Bundy not in every
case was there conflict another indirect
aspect of the introduction of the
Christian missionaries beyond the treaty
ports so the rise and fall of home show
check this self-styled brother of Jesus
Christ is going to have his own ideas
about Christianity
revolution in China hosho Chen and his
followers built and managed an
enterprise called the Taiping heavenly
kingdom in this Taiping rebellion that
follows in its way will not only almost
bring the Ching dynasty to its knees and
running to the arms of the foreign
powers for protection it will directly
and indirectly lead to the death of 20
million people there was no estimation
on how many tens of millions survived
the upheaval but who suffered terribly
due to the conflict that lasted from
1850 to 1864 after listening to enough
of these podcasts everyone knows China
had a very very rough century from 1850
to 1950 from the years leading up to the
Taiping rebellion and immediately
afterwards China especially from
Shanghai South was going through
cataclysmic changes central authority
had broken down by this time and for the
mass of the peasantry it was every man
for himself the bad thing about these
post Taiping rebellion times as far as
the jaquez were concerned was that the
one primarily responsible for the whole
Cataclysm was Hong Co Trent and his God
worship Society followers he was a Hakka
and all the earliest converts to his
brand of Christianity were Oaxaca's and
the whole Politburo and Standing
Committee so to speak of the later
Taiping heavenly kingdoms government
were mostly all Hakka so after all the
suffering throughout the land and after
so many people lost so much it was only
human nature that people sought out a
scapegoat and most eyes turned in the
direction of the jaquez and many jaquez
found themselves in the 1860s and 70s
having to carry that cross for the
Taiping rebellion debacle and not only
that during the red turban revolt that
led to the Taiping rebellion the jaquez
had gained a reputation for aiding the
Qing government in tracking down
affected your rebels the enmity between
the bendiga and the Hakka
Randeep on many levels the Hakka as a
people got a lot of dirty looks due to
their heavy involvement in the Taiping
rebellion but later history will record
that their role in creating the Chinese
Republic and overthrowing the Manchus
will also be very conspicuous as you
might expect from all these social and
economic pressures
this caused get another wave of Hakka
migration the Huq has joined the
Cantonese the Chou Joanie's the Hokkien
and others who left China to the
Americas Australia Europe Southeast Asia
and Africa to work the mines and
plantations and build the railroads and
all across Southeast Asia the Hakka
people carved out enclaves and built
lies for themselves and never skipped a
beat as far as adhering to their Hakka
language culture and traditions theirs
was a portable culture they took it with
them wherever they went its earliest
roots were planted along the Yellow
River in the cradle of North China
civilization and were transported to
places in Fujian jiangshi Guangdong all
the way to Sichuan and now in the
aftermath of the Taiping rebellion and
in the face of so much hardship in a
China that was so down-on-her-luck
the Hakka spread their wings and
migrated to places both near to and far
from China they were different from
other groups of Han Chinese the
Cantonese thus young those were the
people from Hunan the Shanghainese the
mean aka Fujian ease aka the Hokkien the
chow Shan people of chow chow and
Shantou all these major linguistic
groups of southern China with their
distinct language and culture were all
more or less associated with a single
area their culture their language and
their history we're all tied to these
lands were they predominated but not the
Hakka theirs was a language and culture
that
didn't have its roots anywhere close to
where they in the 19th century might
pull a plow Majo was their homeland but
it was an adopted homeland the center of
haka gravity was that region where three
provinces came together Guangdong Fujian
and Jiang Shi but the Hakka people could
be found all throughout southern and
southwestern China and according to the
terms of the convention of peking
concerning the lease of the hong kong
new territories to britain for 99 years
any Hakka among the 84 thousand or so
people who already called the NT their
home at the time in 1898 was considered
a bundy as far as the hong kong
government was concerned and the hong
kong bundy had special rights that the
rest of Hongkongers didn't have they
they held special rights to their lands
they can bury their dead in the hills
they had special rights regarding
management of their property they could
act as the role of judge and jury and
matters regarding their kinship affairs
in this example a haka could also be
considered Bundy if they had gotten to
certain places early enough from this
mid 19th century migration rich haka
centres were built in Singapore Malaysia
Thailand Burma and in India they were
Fairless and pretty much went wherever
the opportunity was many had already
long blazed the trail early on haka
adventurers had been searching for gold
and Kelantan since the 17th and 18th
centuries I could probably do all
podcast series on the haka of dong
Nanyang Southeast Asia the Huq of people
in the face of all this hardship and all
these milestone moments in China's
history began to define their identity
and their place in the big picture in
the face of all these derogatory
stereotypes the jaquez proved themselves
as good as the next man and this
contributed to their stubborn
determination to stick together delight
in clannish nests and give back whatever
they got the famous writer
Han suyin was born a Hakka father and a
Flemish mother she had written regarding
the jaquez migration south after the
Mongol invasions of the 13th century
quote the Hawkins were driven further
south or too mountainous poor areas
because of their mobility hardihood and
fierceness the dynasties began to regard
the jaquez as potential pioneers good
for resettling the sub populated areas
circumstance
thus define their group character
clannish thrifty loyal to each other bad
neighbors and ready fighters the name
haka stuck to them and they became proud
of it
end quote a prominent early
twentieth-century haka historian she
attend you wrote quote the character of
the Jaquez is shown quite clearly in
their name and history they are a strong
hearty energetic fearless race with
simple habits but a very contentious and
liturgist disposition self-reliant and
active their rapid expansion and
fondness for property have often brought
them into conflict with their neighbors
the Jaquez are a people of the future
unhampered by the prejudices or the
easygoing slackness of the old
landowners fundamentally the haka is a
farmer forced by poverty to struggle
with the unproductive soil they usually
occupy the hilly and less fertile
districts while the bundi remain in
possession of the fertile deltas and
plains the sexes are not so strictly
separated in domestic life as in the
case with some of the other Chinese the
women folk are strong and energetic and
have never adopted foot-binding as a
custom end quote I took that quote from
University of Pittsburgh professor and
director of their Asian Studies center
Nicole constable she was quoting to
offer an example how the quote legend
was passed on that isn't to say it
wasn't true but this stereotypical
narrative persisted nonetheless the
Hakka women are legendary
now who is to say a Hakka woman is any
harder working than some woman from
Chile nor
wand but even I have heard in casual
conversations over the years that taco
women and perhaps the naxi women of
Yunnan are traditionally said to be the
most hard-working with the Hakka women
know there were reasons for that in the
19th century when so many of their men
folk tried their luck overseas in a
foreign land the Hakka wife left behind
would have to pick up the husband's
slack in addition to her everyday
responsibilities this included of course
the children the grandparents the
finances the hearth the home the animals
I mean I have a I have a friend in Hong
Kong who told me there was this saying
that no Cantonese woman would marry a
Hakka man because so big were those
shoes of the Hakka women
she'd have to work herself to death to
take care of her man in his household at
the level of service that only a Hakka
woman knew how to do the expectations
were just too high the Hakka women never
had bound feet so that was something
else that contributed to their legendary
hard-working ways the Cantonese
disparaged Hakka men for not binding
their women's feet and call them qu
colds for allowing them to run around
wild and in all sources I read there are
articles and whatnot that mention Hakka
women being regular fixtures at Hong
Kong construction sites working right
there alongside the men doing the
hardest jobs always recognizable by
their iconic black hats that may be the
best-known Hakka
symbol those flat black circular hats
with 360 degrees of Fringe surrounding
them speaking of 360 degrees another
icon of Hakka culture are their
distinctive to low buildings from the
outside they look like round shaped
three to four storey fortresses well
this is what they were meant to be in a
way they acted as a fortress as well as
a family compound where everyone in the
clan could have a place to live together
these buildings were called too low tool
means earth and low means building they
were these round and also rectangular
buildings made from
compressed earth or Adobe a meter in
thickness
they weren't impregnable castles but
they weren't so easy to take down either
and besides they kept the entire Hakka
community of a certain area all in one
place in times like the Bundy haka clan
wars there was always strength in
numbers and certainly back in those days
everyone liked to hang with their own
kind the round structure of these tulo
symbolized Union the rectangular tulo
were shaped like the Chinese character
way as in the verb to return the
ancestral temple was always placed in
the center and of course whatever
addressing ancestors only the Hakka
dialect could be used the most famous
place these days to go see to low
buildings is in young King County and
Fujin near the Guangdong border not too
far north of Mei Chao along with the
circular and rectangular tulo are the
way long wool buildings way means to
surround long is a dragon and wool means
room imagine concentric u-shaped
structures and you get the main idea
these are mostly to be found in and
around Majo during the hottest part of
the Cold War US spy satellites saw these
round to low and Fujian and they thought
they were missile silos that's what they
look like from outer space with the help
of a spy satellite that is Hakka culture
is famous for among other things their
foods and their folk songs if you go on
Youku or YouTube and query Hakka folk
songs or the Chinese characters could ya
shankha you'll get plenty of examples of
Hakka folk songs I invite you to go
check that out there is a genre of these
mountain songs that Hakka women sing
that we're quite you know flirtatious
and risque with the dialogue that would
be sung between Hakka women and Hakka
men I mentioned young tofu and Yin Xiu
Jie already perhaps the two most famous
Hakka foods Nyong'o foo is maybe the
most special of all and
must be on the table of any
self-respecting Hakka family a Chinese
New Year the Hakka came from the north
the traditional wheat and barley region
of China rice the southern staple came
later to that part of China so the
people in the north were heavy on
noodles and dumplings on the Hakka
hastily evacuated their homeland in the
north they found that in the south there
wasn't any wheat available but they did
have dough foo so if you can imagine
substituting a cube of dough foo for a
dumpling wrapper you know what I'm
getting at the meat would be mixed with
dried mushroom dried shrimp or fish
it could be steamed or fried and it's a
must on Chinese New Year mid-autumn
festival weddings and on your birthday
Niang tofu comes round in shape and
squares in many sorts of ways young tofu
is the signature ha kodesh I also
mentioned Yin juji salt baked chicken
yeah Anju means salt baked this dish is
also quintessentially Hakka the perfect
dish for a people on the run who found
it impractical to carry live chickens
with them salt from the earliest times
in human history was used as a
preservative thanks to how it worked
against bacteria mold and spoiling
because of the way sodium chloride was
it sucked out all the moisture through
osmosis and without any moisture no
bacteria could reproduce a 20%
concentration of salt will kill most
bacteria and any sort of microbe that a
Hakka
on-the-run might encounter seawater is
only three-and-a-half percent salt Hakka
salt baked chicken is baked inside this
layer of rock salt and authentic yin Zhu
Zhi takes a long time to prepare and
make Hakka pounded tea there lay cha is
another unique Hakka specialty I
neglected to mention this in the history
of tea series this tea of which there is
a whole non version as well consists of
tea leaves herbs peanuts pine
nuts or one or two other kinds of seeds
are not some puffed rice or wheat is
also added it's not a tea meant for a
tea ceremony it's more like a soup than
anything it comes in sweet and savory
versions leach oz history goes back to
the Han Dynasty Three Kingdoms period
you can get this wherever Hakka people
congregate in big numbers it's a common
food of Singapore and Malaysia as well
you could buy it instant in these easy
to serve foil packages to Hakka oil
paper umbrellas were also something they
did especially well and were also
renowned for in their day and Hakka
styles of kungfu were great
contributions to Chinese martial arts
Mary Arbaugh pointed out in her book
about revolution as a Hakka Enterprise
Sun yat-sen was Hakka and so were many
of his lieutenants during the lead-up to
1911 in addition to this she said quote
the Hakka are an impoverished and
stigmatized subgroup of Han Chinese who
settlements are scattered from Jiang Shi
to Sichuan socialist revolution meshed
well with the Hakka tradition of
militant descent so that they're 3% of
the mainland population has been three
times more likely than other Han to hold
high position six of the nine Soviet
guerrilla bases were in Hakka territory
while the route of the Long March moved
from Hakka village to Hakka village in
1984 half the Standing Committee of the
Politburo were Hakka and quote famous
Hakka well I already mentioned home show
tren Sun yat-sen Han su Yin the list is
quite long the Hakka Hall of Fame of
course has done Xiao ping he's he's
pretty high up and important
he played down his family's Hakka
origins but he was Hakka
according to Harrison Salsbury who heard
it in young shun-kun
young had told Salisbury that Dunn was
descended from a Cheyenne Jaquez
Singapore's former PM legend in his own
time Lee Kuan Yew famously Hakka
in CCP history there's Judah yeah Chen
yang su you Chagny
Hua Guofeng who yell bang whoa Moreau
all Hakka Leo bong and niranjan maybe
were Hakka but this hasn't been proved
Jean guatrau mouths rival for power in
the 1930s Hakka there was also a young
show who we covered in episode CHP 71 he
was a Hakka who rose to great heights
and the song government how about Auburn
ha and his brother ah boom par they
brought his Tiger Balm oil they're also
a topic that made it to the original
list I came up with almost five years
ago still haven't gotten around to them
yet fascinating story Hey and veteran
actor and coolness personified Jolyon
fought Hakka ancestry to get yin yang by
the way was from nation the worldwide
corporate headquarters of all things
Hakka so he was considered during his
lifetime somewhat of a poster boy in
China how high up Hakka might rise there
was a time in the 1980s when the leaders
of Singapore Taiwan and China were all
of Hakka descent Lee Kuan Yew
Lee Donghae and Deng Xiao ping uh
Charlie song he was a Hakka that made
all his famous children song Eiling song
Ching Ling and song mei-ling and TVs
song all Hakka to it was that Hakka bond
that tied Charlie song to Sun yat-sen
and Suns vision for a modern Chinese
Republic the list of Hakka greats from
history goes on but after looking at my
watch I can see we're now into stoppage
time so I'll cut it short right here a
last episode in part 10 of the T series
I mentioned Hunan Xiang yang mal G and T
as being the tea that has grown in the
most northerly part of China well I
stand corrected in leshan in Shandong
near Qingdao they grow tea up there too
and this nice lush on green tea enjoys
the extra added benefit of the pure
underground aquifer
solution close by so thanks to shell ray
when laucher for pointing that nugget
out hey
when laos shirts from qingdao so of
course she wasn't going to stand idly by
and allow me to falsely proclaim that
the most northern grown tea in china's
and xin young and who none and she had
to stand up for Shandong province and
say something the superb British writer
Jemima Steinfeld has a brand new book
out it's so new that it's not even out
yet here in the beautiful country but I
see Amazon in the UK is already shipping
it little Emperor's and material girls
youth and sex in modern China you won't
be able to get any of this information
from Xinhua love life and sexuality in
China amongst the young generation
writer Jemima Steinfeld ladies and
gentlemen little Emperor's and material
girls youth and sex in modern China the
book will be out end of April 2015 but
you could pre-order now that's it until
next time this is Laszlo Montgomery
signing off from a secret location and
beautiful sunny Southern California the
lead news items on TV are scenes from
the snow and freezing cold in the
eastern part of the country
man no such thing here blue skies and my
windows are open here at the CHP
research and recording complex this is
the first episode of the goat year I
hope the year is fantastic for all of
you my good looking listeners thanks for
listening and I hope you'll come back
next time for another exciting episode
of the China history podcast